---
title: "Let's close the year"
date: 2021-12-31T20:04:04+01:00
draft: false
tags: ["self"]
categories: ["2021"]
---
And so, this is already the end of the year.

No year in review today, I'm definitely too lazy tonight. All I could say is that the year went by very quickly in the end. I did the job I had planned to do, besides the move and the unexpected medical care, and I could have tinkered a bit more with Scheme and Lisp, but that's for another time probably. Today, I'm sick (no COVID, though, just a heavy cold) and alone at home. I have, however, enough alcohol to finish my evening looking at the Christmas tree, reading a novel before falling asleep quietly until tomorrow.

I wish I still felt like drawing, but I don't think I feel like it anymore.

{{< fluid_imgs
  "pure-u-1-3|"
  "pure-u-1-3|/img/66137812700__90B2FFAD-74D9-4575-8714-3459519468DF.JPG"
  "pure-u-1-3|" >}}

Same for writing.

> En tirant sur sa mèche<br>
> Je vis apparaître des flocons encore vierges<br>
> $\quad\quad\quad$ de toute trace d'encre<br>
> Je décidais de prendre sa main<br>
> Et tout mon bras se vida de son sang<br>
>  $\quad\quad\quad$ pour n'être plus qu'une aile repliée<br>
> Lorsque j'ai caressé ses lèvres<br>
> Le sol se déroba sous mes pieds<br>
>  $\quad\quad\quad$ me laissant en suspension au-dessus de son corps<br>
> Elle prit enfin mon autre main<br>
> Pour ne plus que je m'évapore<br>
> Mais au lieu de la serrer<br>
> Elle a souri et ses yeux sont devenus un reflet<br>
> où je voyais danser de minuscules filaments<br>
> $\quad\quad\quad$ de mon désir<br>
>
> Quand je m'éveillais et que je ne sentis plus sa main<br>
> Je sus qu'elle m'avait dévoré durant mon sommeil<br>

I upgraded my Python, Racket and R packages yesterday, mad made a complete backup of my `$HOME` directory today. While everything went fine with R and Racket, I broke my `pylsp` installation, which occurs more often than I would. Every. Single. Time. (This time, the problem came from the `tomli` dependency). I also added 'kosayoda/nvim-lightbulb' to my list of Neovim plugins in order to make code actions more discoverable. Actually, they are available for Haskell, Rust, Python (although it looks like garbage most of the time), and Clojure. At least, those are the languages I use the most with LSP. I also added 'eraserhd/parinfer-rust' recently. It works like a charm and it makes working with s-expressions much smoother, especially when deleting part of a form. Finally, I tried another polyglot REPL: 'hkupty/iron.nvim' (as a replacement to neoterm, which appears to be on hold since a few months).

Happy new year to all of you!

{{% music %}}Nick Cave & The Bad Seeds • _Slowly Goes The Night_{{% /music %}}
