---
title: "Micro posting in November"
date: 2024-12-02T21:24:37+01:00
draft: false
tags: ["micro"]
categories: ["2024"]
---

<a href="#" style="text-decoration: none;">2024-11-11</a>: /me is listening to "Love Hides" by The Doors<br>
<a href="#" style="text-decoration: none;">2024-11-11</a>: Apparently, they will soon get a new home!
{{< fluid_imgs"pure-u-1-3|/img/IMG_4062.JPG""pure-u-1-3|/img/IMG_4072.JPG""pure-u-1-3|/img/IMG_4132.JPG" >}}<br>
<a href="#" style="text-decoration: none;">2024-11-11</a>: I'm pretty happy with new management system for my audio file. Thanks to [Beets](https://beets.io) I now have access to the whole power of command line utilities. Here's a brief overview of the top genres in my library:

```shell
» beet summarize | head -n 12
genre                  | count
---------------------- | -----
Rock                   | 3045
Post-Punk              | 2754
Jazz                   | 2509
Alternative            | 1212
Electronic             | 948
Indie Rock             | 838
Pop                    | 817
Classic Rock           | 679
Alternative Rock       | 497
Indie Pop              | 424
```
How many total tracks having a genre tag, excluding tracks from playlists which contain, following poor design choice, duplicate records?

```shell
» beet summarize ^context:playlist | head -n 12 | cut -f2 -d\| | tail -n +3 | paste -sd+ | bc
10603
```

And so on… Wanna looks at the tlistening stats for the current song?

```shell
» beet ls -f '$artist ($album): $title ($length) [$genre, $play_count, $last_played]' $(mpc current | sed s/-//)
Diana Krall (The Girl in the Other Room): Narrow Daylight (3:31) [Contemporary Jazz, 12, 2024-11-11 20:38:09]
```

<a href="#" style="text-decoration: none;">2024-11-11</a>: [The Beauty of $\LaTeX$](https://nitens.org/w/latex/): Some of the crap that has kept me from using MS Word for years. Now I'm too old and remain a happy $\TeX$er for the days ahead. Fun thing: we did the same MSc (which was called a DEA at that time in France) one year apart!<br>
<a href="#" style="text-decoration: none;">2024-11-25</a>: I've spent a few more or less pleasant days, long ones in any case, reconfiguring my old 12-inch macbook. Guess what about my [Dell laptop](/post/bye-bye-apple/) and my fresh configuration of [Ubuntu 24.04 LTS](/post/ubuntu-24.04/): the power supply blew up and the SSD along with it. Now everything seems workable (at the very best, for a 6-year old OS). More to come in a blog post later.<br>
<a href="#" style="text-decoration: none;">2024-11-26</a>: I'm not in the mood of writing a full blog post to summarize my recent comeback to OS X. It's still OS X on my machine, but I know it evolved as something else since 2018. I don't know if I'm ready to buy a new Macbook _with_ the accompagnying OS. I liked and I still like Mojave so much. Yet it was pretty painful to resurrect this [laptop](/post/setup-2018/): Homebrew has no "bottles" for oldy software, which means I had to recompile everything from scratch for 60% of the software I reinstalled. I got into trouble with GPG, GitHub https auth, zsh misbehaving on OS X for no reason, minor annoyances with the Linux -> OS X switch, and so on. Finally, I'm close to the end of the migration process. It took me 5 full days! And I had to somehow relearn macOS shorcuts.  Muscle memory helped in most cases, but still... [So long, Apple](/post/micro-10-2020/) `#apple`<br>
<a href="#" style="text-decoration: none;">2024-11-26</a>: TIL that `TERM=xtermm` on Darwin behaves like `TERM=xterm-mono` on Linux. That was helpful to force Neomutt or Cmus to use mono color by default. Moreover, if you use `TERM=vt100` for Neomutt, it behaves more smoothly when fetching new mail with mbsync. `#apple`<br>
<a href="#" style="text-decoration: none;">2024-11-28</a>: Currently rebuilding my iTunes library. Back in 2016 it wasn't the time to switch to Apple Music and TV. I'm on an unsupported laptop and OS right now, but it feels so good. Yet, congrats to Apple because I can retrieve all my data in just two or three clicks. `#apple`<br>
<a href="#" style="text-decoration: none;">2024-11-29</a>: With that damn machine crash last week, I'm in the process of retagging my music library (after re-downloading some albums from YT for the second time), and soon everything should be ready to join my iTunes library, neglected since 2016. The last title I bought from Apple was the Glenn Gould album, BTW.<br>
